admin/Curriculum.md, before:

## Philosophy of the Project Progression

- The sequence of five projects are designed to prepare the students to complete their own independent research project at the end of the program.
- There are five projects, building in complexity and autonomy.  The topics are:
     1. Introduce your home watershed - a qualitative presentation of the student's level of hydrogeologic knowledge upon entering the program - water availability and quality
     2. Explain an Arizona Department of Water Resources model report to a general audience - tackling technical concepts and presentation of data without the need to complete quantitative analyses - water balance and salinity
     3. Use the MODFLOW model from the previous study to examine zone of influence, capture zone, and capture and to explore superposition - modifying and using a MODFLOW model to understand hydrogeologic systems - pumping effects and arsenic
     4. Use analytical models to examine higher dimensional problems, specifically 'fair' water allocation in the Little Plover - using groundwater models to address water resources decision making - capture
     5. Use a solute transport model to examine contamination - student can choose a model of nitrate cycling or PFAS mobilization - sensitivity analysis, prediction uncertainty, coupled modeling, unsaturated flow and transport
- Each project lasts five weeks and students are given weekly milestones (ungraded) to guide them in planning completion of a long term project
- Projects 3, 4, and 5 are completd in three-person teams.  Each team has a project manager, an analyst, and a data wrangler with specified roles.
- Project 6 is a five-week period put aside for students to propose their scientific investigation, develop milestones, and begin their work.  Students will spend a minimum of 6 weeks in the summer with no classes, working exclusively on their projects. 

## -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
## The Little Plover Study - General Learning Objectives
 
At this point, the students have read, summarized, and presented on a technical report.  They have also used MODFLOW and chemical analyses to better understand some technical aspects of a hydrogeologic system.  For this project, we want to put the emphasis on how hydrogeology can be used to support improved water resources decision making.  Technical elements will be included, but the focus will be better understanding the value and limitations of hydrogeologic analysis in a human context.  To help them to take this perspective, the project should start with presenting the question of how water can be shared fairly.  Then we will introduce the tools that can be used to quantify their fair-sharing schemes.  In the end, we want them to spend time reflecting on the hydrogeologist's role in informing debate without, necessarily, taking a position or making the decisions. 
 
## -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
## The Little Plover Study - Milestones
 - Read about the area to understand the hydrogeologic and hydrometeorological setting.  Learn about how and why the Little Plover was deemed to be oversubscribed.  Humanize a range of water users to understand their relationship with groundwater and how they value it.  Based on fairness, equity, or other value measures, describe at least three approaches that could be used to reapportion water use.  Each approach should allow for variable total reduction in water extraction.  For example, each user could be reduced by a fixed percent based on their average pumping over the last ten years: the fixed percent could be 1, 2, 5, 25 until the total capture is acceptable.  Justify the fairness of each approach.     
 - 'Read' the MODFLOW model and 'reverse engineer' a conceptual model of the Little Plover.  Run the MODFLOW model once to determine the run time.  Discuss how the model could be run to determine the depletion reduction for a range of implementation levels (e.g. percent reduction for each pumped well).  Estimate the time that woudl be required to modify the MODFLOW input files, run the model, and extract the results of interest for each implementation level.  Discuss the practicality of using MODFLOW for this analysis.  
 - Introduce the analytical solution.  Ideally, show them a comparison of the solution with pumping from one well to introduce the idea of 'validating' an analytical solution based on a numerical model; compare this to calibrating a groundwater model against observations.  If practical, also show the results for multiple interfering wells.  Use the analytical model to determine the capture fraction of all of the wells in the basin.  Each group should use the analytical model to implement one reallocation strategy over a range of implementation levels.    
 - Share the capture versus implementation level results among the groups.  Each group should consider the costs to all stakeholders of each reallocation strategy.  For three given levels of total capture reduction, they should choose an optimal realloation strategy and justify the choice to three different stakeholder groups.  After completing this, reflect on what parts of this process you feel should be the professional domain of a hydrogeologist.  For any area that is outside of the scope of a hydrogeologist, justify its exclusion and, if possible, describe the expertise needed to address this area.
 - Produce a draft report.  This is a technical report and your audience is a board of elected officials, government experts, and citizens who will jointly decide how to reallocate pumping rights.  You do not need to explain any technical concepts to the audience.  But you should justify your technical decisions - such as using the analytical solution for your analyses.  You should clearly state any assumptions that you make about how different stakeholders value water.  You should present your technical work in sufficient detail that a professional hydrogeologist could replicate your work.  
 
## -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
## The Little Plover Study - Needs
 - Background material on the hydrogeologic and hydrometeorological setting.
 - Background material on the assessment that the Little Plover is oversubscribed - also introduces the major stakeholder groups.
 - Background material for students to read to be able to humanize a range of water users to understand their relationship with groundwater and how they value it - can be more general than the Little Plover.
 - Links to resources introducing fairness, equity, or other value measures - ideally as they relate to groundwater, but more general references can also be useful.
 - Access to the MODFLOW input files so that they can 'read' the model and assess how difficult it might be to modify the inputs to conduct their analyses.
 - The MODFLOW model set up so that it can be run as it exists - MF6 would be great, but MODFLOW2005 would be fine for now - they should be able to do this without too much handholding.    
 - The analytical solution(s) - key references and the Jupyter Notebook to implement it.
 - Guidance on how to compare the numerical and analytical solutions for one well and two or more wells.  
 - Links to references on how groundwater value can be defined for different stakeholders

Commit message:

new notebooks for fish/money pareto evals

admin/Curriculum.md, after:

## Philosophy of the Project Progression

- The sequence of five projects are designed to prepare the students to complete their own independent research project at the end of the program.
- There are five projects, building in complexity and autonomy.  The topics are:
     1. Introduce your home watershed - a qualitative presentation of the student's level of hydrogeologic knowledge upon entering the program - water availability and quality
     2. Explain an Arizona Department of Water Resources model report to a general audience - tackling technical concepts and presentation of data without the need to complete quantitative analyses - water balance and salinity
     3. Use the MODFLOW model from the previous study to examine zone of influence, capture zone, and capture and to explore superposition - modifying and using a MODFLOW model to understand hydrogeologic systems - pumping effects and arsenic
     4. Use analytical models to examine higher dimensional problems, specifically 'fair' water allocation in the Little Plover - using groundwater models to address water resources decision making - capture
     5. Use a solute transport model to examine contamination - student can choose a model of nitrate cycling or PFAS mobilization - sensitivity analysis, prediction uncertainty, coupled modeling, unsaturated flow and transport
- Each project lasts five weeks and students are given weekly milestones (ungraded) to guide them in planning completion of a long term project
- Projects 3, 4, and 5 are completd in three-person teams.  Each team has a project manager, an analyst, and a data wrangler with specified roles.
- Project 6 is a five-week period put aside for students to propose their scientific investigation, develop milestones, and begin their work.  Students will spend a minimum of 6 weeks in the summer with no classes, working exclusively on their projects. 

## -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
## The Little Plover Study - General Learning Objectives
 
At this point, the students have read, summarized, and presented on a technical report.  They have also used MODFLOW and chemical analyses to better understand some technical aspects of a hydrogeologic system.  For this project, we want to put the emphasis on how hydrogeology can be used to support improved water resources decision making.  Technical elements will be included, but the focus will be better understanding the value and limitations of hydrogeologic analysis in a human context.  To help them to take this perspective, the project should start with presenting the question of how water can be shared fairly.  Then we will introduce the tools that can be used to quantify their fair-sharing schemes.  In the end, we want them to spend time reflecting on the hydrogeologist's role in informing debate without, necessarily, taking a position or making the decisions. 
 
## -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
## The Little Plover Study - Milestones
 - Read about the area to understand the hydrogeologic and hydrometeorological setting.  Learn about how and why the Little Plover was deemed to be oversubscribed.  Humanize a range of water users to understand their relationship with groundwater and how they value it.  Based on fairness, equity, or other value measures, describe at least three approaches that could be used to reapportion water use.  Each approach should allow for variable total reduction in water extraction.  For example, each user could be reduced by a fixed percent based on their average pumping over the last ten years: the fixed percent could be 1, 2, 5, 25 until the total capture is acceptable.  Justify the fairness of each approach.     
 - 'Read' the MODFLOW model and 'reverse engineer' a conceptual model of the Little Plover.  Run the MODFLOW model once to determine the run time.  Discuss how the model could be run to determine the depletion reduction for a range of implementation levels (e.g. percent reduction for each pumped well).  Estimate the time that woudl be required to modify the MODFLOW input files, run the model, and extract the results of interest for each implementation level.  Discuss the practicality of using MODFLOW for this analysis.  
 - Introduce the analytical solution.  Ideally, show them a comparison of the solution with pumping from one well to introduce the idea of 'validating' an analytical solution based on a numerical model; compare this to calibrating a groundwater model against observations.  If practical, also show the results for multiple interfering wells.  Use the analytical model to determine the capture fraction of all of the wells in the basin.  Each group should use the analytical model to implement one reallocation strategy over a range of implementation levels.    
 - Share the capture versus implementation level results among the groups.  Each group should consider the costs to all stakeholders of each reallocation strategy.  For three given levels of total capture reduction, they should choose an optimal realloation strategy and justify the choice to three different stakeholder groups.  After completing this, reflect on what parts of this process you feel should be the professional domain of a hydrogeologist.  For any area that is outside of the scope of a hydrogeologist, justify its exclusion and, if possible, describe the expertise needed to address this area.
 - Produce a draft report.  This is a technical report and your audience is a board of elected officials, government experts, and citizens who will jointly decide how to reallocate pumping rights.  You do not need to explain any technical concepts to the audience.  But you should justify your technical decisions - such as using the analytical solution for your analyses.  You should clearly state any assumptions that you make about how different stakeholders value water.  You should present your technical work in sufficient detail that a professional hydrogeologist could replicate your work.  
 
## -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
## Major Steps
- Background reading: students should gain an appreciation for the range of water 'users' and how they value water.  Ideally, this will include some information on the value of water to farmers (for different crops, as needed) and the fish vs flow curve. It would be great if we could include one or both of: value per volume of water by crop type and marginal cost of pumping reduction - presumably an s-curve of some type with relative value of 1 for current pumping rate and down to some level of reduction, 0 above some level of reduction, and a smooth (or ramped) transition.
- Simple optimization: each group may choose any number of wells to reduce, each at any level of reduction, to meet or exceed a streamflow target.  Each group should find three 'plans' that meet the objective equally well and then give a rationale to support one plan over the others.  
- Pareto optimization: placing wide limits on the level of reduction (or increase), do single parameter optimization aimed at meeting the flow target while maximizing total pumping.  Present the results as a ranked series with x- as the rank (1=best) and y- as the total streamflow,  Identify their three plans by red dots.  Identify their preferred plan by a red star.  Discuss their three plans in the context of automated optimization.  Provide an initial reflection on the value of automated optimization and on the use of the surrogate analytical model versus MODFLOW.
- Multiobjective optimization: produce the tradeoff of streamflow versus total reduction, only loosely constraining the increase/decrease in pumping for a single well.  Then each group will describe three 'fair' plans to impose (e.g. reduce proportional to capture fraction with no well reduced more than 50%).  They will produce the pareto plot (grey and blue dots) for each plan.  Then they will superimpose the Pareto fronts for their three plans and for the initial, relatively unconstrained optimization.  From this, they will discuss the 'cost' of the fairness limits that they imposed. They will propose their best plan.  The Pareto fronts for the best plans for all four teams will be shown on a common plot together with the unconstrained case.  
- Multiobjective optimization in 'value' space: streamflow will be translated into 'stream health' based on the fish versus flow plot and total pumping will be translated to 'economic value' based on the value/volume or marginal reduction in value relation.  Unconstrained multiobjective optimization will be performed as will the four optimal plans.  As above, the Pareto fronts for the best plans for all four teams will be shown on a common plot together with the unconstrained case.  Each team should decide on the optimal plan and defend their choice based on scientific grounds and on the basis of fairness. 

## -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
## The Little Plover Study - Needs
 - Background material on the hydrogeologic and hydrometeorological setting.
 - Background material on the assessment that the Little Plover is oversubscribed - also introduces the major stakeholder groups.
 - Background material for students to read to be able to humanize a range of water users to understand their relationship with groundwater and how they value it - can be more general than the Little Plover.
 - Links to resources introducing fairness, equity, or other value measures - ideally as they relate to groundwater, but more general references can also be useful.
 - Access to the MODFLOW input files so that they can 'read' the model and assess how difficult it might be to modify the inputs to conduct their analyses.
 - The MODFLOW model set up so that it can be run as it exists - MF6 would be great, but MODFLOW2005 would be fine for now - they should be able to do this without too much handholding.    
 - The analytical solution(s) - key references and the Jupyter Notebook to implement it.
 - Guidance on how to compare the numerical and analytical solutions for one well and two or more wells.  
 - Links to references on how groundwater value can be defined for different stakeholders
